#labels Featured,Phase-Implementation,Phase-Deploy
= Installation Guide for Drupal Module =

This page will show you how to install and enable EzMath on Drupal 6.

===System Requirement===
 # Unix/Linux base sever
 # Web server with PHP 5 or above
 # Drupal 6

==Prerequisite Drupal Modules==
 # Filter (core)
 # Libraries API
 # MathJax


=Prerequisite Modules Installation=

==Libraries API==
 # Download `Libraries API` from http://drupal.org/project/libraries
 # Uncompress archive and rename it to `libraries` under `modules` directory.

==MathJax Module==
 # Download `MathJax Module` from http://drupal.org/project/mathjax
 # Uncompress archive and rename it to `mathjax` under `modules` directory.

==MathJax Software==
 # Download `MathJax Software` from http://www.mathjax.org/download/
 # Create your `libraries` directory (e.g. /sites/all/libraries)
 # Uncompress archive and rename it to `mathjax` under `libraries` directory.

After finished this 3 installation, enable `Libraries` and `Mathjax` modules. Enable modules at `Administer >> Site building >> Modules`.

=Configuration=

==Remove Single Dollar Sign Recognition==

This will allow your site's members write single Dollar sign ($) without turn it into math accidentally.

 # Go to your MathJax module folder. Open `mathjax.js` with text editor.
 # Search for line that contain `inlineMath` (line 18), replace all line with:
{{{
'inlineMath: ["\\\\(","\\\\)"]],' +
}}}


=EzMath Installation=

 # Download and uncompress `EzMath1.x.tar.gz` in side your modules folder, which default place is `/sites/all/modules`.
 # Enable `EzMath filter` module at `Administer >> Site building >> Modules`. (also check MathJax module to be enable!)
 # Add `EzMath` input at `Administer >> Site configuration >> Input formats`.
 # Go to `Rearrange` tab and weight EzMath to 0, or first execute filter.
 # Test by post new content by place EzMath syntax between $$ ... $$, e.g.
{{{
$$ a[i][j] * Xi^"T" = [i,j;4,2;x,0] $$
}}}