#summary This guide shows you how to use EzMath instead of LaTeX when writting posts or comments.
#labels Featured,Phase-Design,Phase-Support

=Quick EzMath Syntax Guide=

This guide shows you how to use EzMath instead of LaTeX when writting posts or comments.

EzMath is way easier to use than LaTeX.
However, you can mix LaTeX with EzMath if you really want to and you know how.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

=Start=

For an in-line math, write EzMath syntax inside 

{{{
$$ ... $$
}}}

Or feed before and after EzMath syntax like this:

{{{
$$
...
$$
}}}

for a displaystyle math (separate line from text, align at the center of page).


==General Rules==

EzMath syntax is case sensitive.

Although you can type-in any language if you wish. We recommend only English alphabets, modern numeric digits, and standard symbols.

{{{
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 + - * / | \ ^ = ( ) [ ] { } < >
~ ? ! @ $ % & , . " ' : ; _ # space newline
}}}

Space and tab is not consider as page alignment, use `_` (underscore) and `__` (double underscore) instead.

Space is frequently unnecessary, so you may write:

{{{
a+b=c^2
}}}

But, to prevent ambiguity, you should always use space to separate every single word, like this:

{{{
z = x i + y
}}}

Newline character generally produce a line feed, use this carefuly since it can conflict with LaTeX syntax (like `a/<newline>b`).

Use `#` (hash) to align following sentence in the same vertical position as others line.

{{{
  a # = 22
  b # = 7
a/b # ~~ pi
}}}

Note that `#` can not be place inside any parentheses.

=Atom=

Atom is the smallest part in EzMath syntax. You can use them to form mathematical sentence.


==Numbers==

There are 4 types of numbers: integer, decimal, transcendental, and repeating decimal.

For the first 3 types, EzMath will recognize them as numbers in the way of WYSIWYG.

{{{
42, 0.25, 3.1416...
}}}

The last one, repeating decimal, must be written in this from.

{{{
0.0...238095... ,or 0....9...
}}}

Note that the numbers can contain only digits and periods.


==Symbols==

Treat the most of frequently use symbol as the way you done with most computer program.

*Elementary symbol:*

Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division.

{{{
+ - * //
}}}

*Addition elementary:*

Dot product, factorial, divides, plus-minus, minus-plus, equivalence relation, more.

{{{
. ! | +- -+ ~ ...
}}}

*Complex elementary:*

{{{
(+) (-) (*) (/) (.) 
}}}

*Equality:*

Equality, inequality, approximately, congruent, congruent (modulo), proportionality.

{{{
= != ~~ ~= == propto
}}}

*Strict inequality:*

Less than, greater than, much less than, much greater than, less or equal, greater or equal, 

{{{
< > << >> <= >=
}}}

*Logic:*

{{{
and or not union intersect
}}}

*Set:*

{{{
all exists in notin subset supset
}}}

*Arrow:*

Maps to, left arrow, left-right arrow.

{{{
|-> -> <->
}}}

*Other symbol:*

{{{
\ ' : ? $ % & , ;
}}}


==Alphabets and Words==

Each English alphabet will be seen as mathematical variable.
If you want dotless i or j, add `math` after it.
This also work on the `hbar` and `ell`.

{{{
imath, jmath, hbar, ell
}}}

For Greek alphabet, just write them in English.
Use uppercase for first character if you want uppercase Greek alphabet.
Alphabet that has variation can be call by putting var before its name.

{{{
alpha, Delta, varphi
}}}

Set notations are begin with set name, and follow by keyword `set`.

{{{
Eset, Nset, Zset, Qset, Rset, Cset
}}}

And some more symbols.

{{{
infty empty partial nabla
}}}

Functions are written as its name.

{{{
sin, arccos, tanh, max, log, gcd, Re, Im
}}}

And there also some frequently used logic word.

{{{
if, then, else
}}}

Note that inverse trigonometric functions will be display as `function_name^-1`


==Escape Text and LaTeX==

Put text inside `" ... "` to display them as text.
There is no escape character for `"` (quotation mark) yet.

To escape LaTeX, just add `@` (at sign) in front of the text mode.

{{{
@" ... "
}}}

Use this carefully!


==Parentheses==

All left parentheses need right parentheses of the same type, and the right can not be appear before the left.

{{{
() [] {}
}}}

The extra parentheses need its type then follow by `( ... )`.

{{{
abs(ad-bc), norm(z), round(ln x), floor(n/2)
}}}

In case you want to use the right before the left, or only the left (e.g. `(?1, 7]`, `]-infty, 0]`), just passing them under `" ... "`.


===Reduce Parentheses===

There are situation that you might want to wrap many atoms into one, use `( ... )` to wrap them.
This method called Reduce Parentheses. If you place them in the right position, the parentheses will be hide automatically.


=Word=

Word are the combination of atoms.


==Indexing==

To index the atom, treat them the way you done with computer's array.

{{{
a[n], m[i][j]
}}}


==Exponention==

Use `^` (caret) between base and exponent part.

{{{
c^2, a[n]^i, e^(pi i)
}}}

This must be done after indexed, otherwise the indexed will goes to the exponent.


==Accents==

To add accents to word, put this keywords ahead.

{{{
vec(a), bar(z), hat(c), dot(m), ddot(n)
}}}

The accents can be stack.

{{{
vec(dot(a))
}}}

Only `vec`, `bar`, and `hat` can be extended for long word.

{{{
bar(x + y)
}}}

If there are only i or j after `vec`, `bar`, and `hat`; its dot will be removed automatically.

{{{
vec(i), hat(j)
}}}


=Sentence=

Sentence is a group of words and atoms. It can be from in freestyle, but there are also some rule for special form.


==Roots==

The most frequently root, square root, can be call by favorite keyword `sqrt`.

{{{
sqrt(r)
}}}

For the _n_ th root, place keyword `root` between the degree and the root.

{{{
(n)root(r)
}}}


==Fraction==

To express the fraction, use `/` (slash) to separate a numerator and a denominator.

{{{
a/b
}}}

Note that the fraction can not be stack, so you can not write `1/2/3`. If you really want to, use parentheses to group them.


==Combination==

For combination, place keyword `choose` inside the parentheses, with upper part on the left side and lower part on the right side.

{{{
(n choose r)
}}}


==Matrix==

Matrix can be call by `[ ... ]`, when it is not hinge to any atoms (need at least one space before it - otherwise, its goes to indexed).

Each of element inside matrix is separate by `,` (comma) and `;` (semicolon). Comma is use to separate each element into columns, and semicolon separate there rows (newline character will not act as linefeed inside matrix).

{{{
[a, b, c; d, e, f]
}}}

There are keywords to adjust matrix parentheses, which must be place before `[ ... ]` with exactly one space.

{{{
det [a, b; c, d]
parentheses [1, 2, 3; 4, 5, 6]
}}}

Also, LaTeX matrix keyword style are allowed.

{{{
pmatrix, bmatrix, vmatrix, Vmatrix
}}}


===Cases===

Cases can be count as a type of matrix, which left parentheses is "{" and right parentheses is omitted. So we can write cases in this form.

{{{
cases [x, if_ x >= 0; -x, if_ x < 0]
}}}


==Limits==

Use keyword `lim` for limits notation, and keyword `where` follow by condition.

{{{
lim where(n -> infty)
}}}

Keyword `lim` and `where` doesn't require to be place next to each other. So you may write them in sandwich style to improve readability.

{{{
lim x^x where(x -> 0)
}}}


==Integral==

Summation-integral symbol keywords are list bellow.

{{{
int, oint, iint, iiint, sum, prod, coprod, Union, Intersect
}}}

To hinge boundary, use keyword `from ... to ...` or `where ...` like the limits.

{{{
int from a to b x_dx
coprod (4.n^2)/(4.n^2-1) from (n=1) to infty
Union A where (A in M)
}}}

There is no keyword to put only top boundary, but you may adapt this.

{{{
sum f(x) from () to (Rset)
}}}

Note that you can not use this and the limits as exponent part without wrap it inside `( ... )`.

{{{
e^(int x_dx)
}}}


=Technique=

==Chemical Equation==

 # Wrap chemical element inside `" ... "`.
 # Since we didn't have command to add attribute on left side of atom, use invisible atom (`""`) to add attribute before the main atom.
 # Use `-->` to provide a long arrow.
Example:

{{{
$$
""[15]^32 "P" --> ""[16]^32 "S" + beta^- +v
$$
}}}


==Pseudocode==

 # Use `#` at the start of each line to mark start point of paragraph.
 # Use `_` instead of spacebar to add whitespace between words.
 # For each depth inside the code, use `__` after `#` to add tab character.
 # Function name should be wrap between `" ... "` to prevent keyword conflict.
 # Since we kept keyword `to` for integral notation; use `upto`, or `downto` instead.
 # To provide more readability, add line number manually before `#`.
 # Put EzMath close tag ($$) at the end of last line to aligning code on left side.
Example:

{{{
$$
1: # procedure_"factorial"("int"_n)
   # begin
   # __ var_"int"_r = 1
   # __ for_ i := n _downto_ 2 _step_ 1 _do
5: # ____ r <- r * i _od
   # __ return_ r
   # end $$
}}}